Continuous delivery cookbook (#94)
symfonycorp/symfony-cloud-docs: cookbooks/continuous_delivery.rst

Continuous Delivery
===================

> Continuous Delivery is an approach that aims at releasing softwares faster and

Reviewer: `softwares` should be `software` according to https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/softwares

> more frequently. SymfonyCloud can help you achieve implement this methology in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
more frequently. SymfonyCloud can help you implement this methology in
```

several ways we are going to detail in this document.

.. note::

   Continuous Delivery is not to be confused with Continuous Integration or
   automatic testing (even though they can work together): SymfonyCloud will
   **not** run your tests.

> SymfonyCloud provides environments as replicas from your live environment (see

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SymfonyCloud provides environments as replicas of your live environment (see
```

`What is SymfonyCloud? <basics>`_), one will be able to spin-up new environments

> based on their use-case and apply infrastrucutre changes to the SymfonyCloud

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
based on their use-case and apply infrastructure changes to the SymfonyCloud
```

configuration. Because this configuration `is part of their code <config>`_, the

> changes will be recorded in the code versionning and can be integrated within

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
changes will be recorded in version control and can be integrated within
```

the regular code workflow: commit, push, pull/merge requests, code review,

> etc... Once the modification is accepted and brought back to the main branch and

Reviewer: `etc...` -> `etc.`

> etc... Once the modification is accepted and brought back to the main branch and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
etc... Once the modification is accepted and brought back to the default branch and
```

deployed, SymfonyCloud uses the new code and the new configuration at once.

.. caution::

   The number of environments that can be created for a given project is limited

>    depending on its quota (3 by default). Increasing the quota can be done using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   depending on its quota (3 by default). The quota can be increased using
```

   ``symfony project:edit environment X`` (where X must be replaced by the

>    desired number - a multiple of 3) and will impact project's billing based on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   desired number - a multiple of 3) and will impact the project's billing based on
```

   `SymfonyCloud pricing <https://symfony.com/cloud/pricing>`_.

.. tip::

   As a bonus, when SymfonyCloud deploys an application, an image for the
   current tree (the combination of the code and the configuration) is first
   looked up. If a previous build for the same tree is found, this image is
   reused right away leading to faster deployments and more confidence as the
   exact image has been validated.

> When implementing Continuous Delivery with SymfonyCloud, the changes to the
> infrastructure configuration is expected to be mostly manual depending on your
> needs. The automation will focus on spining up environments and deploying the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When implementing Continuous Delivery with SymfonyCloud, changes to the
infrastructure configuration are expected to be mostly manual depending on your
needs. The automation will focus on spining up environments and deploying the
```

changes. There are two possible approaches:

* Fully automated using our `integrations`_
* `Custom implementation`_ using the
  `Symfony CLI <https://symfony.com/download>`_ commands.

Integrations
------------

SymfonyCloud has integrations with the main Git providers of the market. Those

> integrations rely on webhooks that those providers trigger on specific events

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
integrations rely on webhooks these providers trigger on specific events
```

such as code push, branch creation or pull request opening: environments are
created and deleted on the fly when branches are created or deleted, code and
configuration changes are deployed automatically on pushes. Depending on the
configuration on SymfonyCloud side, only specific branches can be deployed or
pull/merge requests can be deployed or skipped.

.. tip::

   To ease reviewers works, for most Git providers, integrations push links to
   the deployed environments as a commit status or as a comment to the
   discussion.

> Please refer to our integrations list to the complete list of the available
> integrations and their specific configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please refer to the list of the available
integrations and their specific configuration.
```

Custom implementation
---------------------

For some projects, it might be more appropriate to use a custom implementation.
With a custom implementation one project can have a semi-automated or a
completely automated delivery pipeline based on the requirements. In this
context, the final logic will depend on the project requirements but you will
find bellow a list of best practices, tips and pointers to help you in your
implementation.

* `Requirements <cd-requirements>`_
* `Create and use a machine user for authentication <machine-user>`_
* `CLI flags and environment variables <cd-env-flags>`_
* `Creating and deleting environments <cd-env-create-delete>`_
* `URLs <cd-url>`_

.. _cd-requirements:

Requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The systement implementing a custom SymfonyCloud deployment automation will have

Reviewer: `systement` -> `system`

several requirements:

#. Have the `Symfony CLI <https://symfony.com/download>`_ installed and runnable

> #. Have Git installed and runnable #. Have `authentication`_ completed

Reviewer: The third `#.` should be on its own line

Authentication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> If the automation is expected to be run interactivtely by humans, thoses humans

Reviewer: `interactivtely` -> `interactively`

must first - locally on their machine - setup Git and run ``symfony login`` as
well as ``symfony account:ssh:key:add``.

.. _machine-user:

In the implementation is to be run in a non-interactive environment (in a system

> like Jenkins, Travis, GitLab CI or GitHub actions for example), we recommend the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
like Jenkins, Travis, GitLab CI or GitHub Actions for example), we recommend the
```

use of a "Machine user". To do so, head to `SymfonyConnect
<https://connect.symfony.com>`_ and register a new account.

> As this context will not be interactive, interactive authentication will not be
> possible, this is why you have to use an :doc:`API token
> </cookbooks/api_tokens>`, additionnaly, as deployment are based on Git, you will
> have to generate an SSH key, and register it in SymfonyCloud:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As this context will not be interactive, an interactive authentication will not be
possible. Instead you will have to use an :doc:`API token
</cookbooks/api_tokens>`. Additionally, as the deployment is based on Git, you will
have to generate an SSH key, and register it in SymfonyCloud:
```

.. code-block:: bash

   ssh-keygen -N '' -f symfonycloud-ci.key SYMFONY_TOKEN=xxxx symfony
   account:ssh:key:add symfonycloud-ci.key

.. caution::

   Don't forget to register and expose the ``SYMFONY_TOKEN`` environment value
   as well as the generated SSH key in your automation system.

.. _cd-env-flags:

CLI flags and environment variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The CLI tool defines several flags and environment flags that allow to change

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The CLI tool has several options and also makes use of environment variables to change
```

> it's behavior. As a general rule, for automated context, environment variables

Reviewer: `it's` -> `its`

> are preferable but flags can be used ponctually if this is required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are preferable but flags can be used if this is required.
```

`ponctually` should be `punctually`, but does not make any sense here.

SYMFONY_PROJECT
"""""""""""""""

> Setting this environment value make useless to run ``symfony project:link``. Its
> value should be set to the SymfonyCloud project's id that can be found with
> ``symfony project:info`` or in the emails sent by SymfonyCloud.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When this environment variable is set, it will not be necessary to run ``symfony project:link``. 

Its value should be set to the SymfonyCloud project's id that can be found with
``symfony project:info`` or in the emails sent by SymfonyCloud.
```

.. tip:: One can also use the ``--project`` flag.

SYMFONY_ENVIRONMENT
"""""""""""""""""""

By default, when SymfonyCloud needs to work on the remote environment, it tries

> to find an exising one whose name matches the current Git branch name. One might

Reviewer: `exising` -> `existing`

> to find an exising one whose name matches the current Git branch name. One might

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to find an existing environment whose name matches the current Git branch name. One might
```

want to change this logic, this can be done by setting this environment variable

> with a different value. You can use the ``symfony envs`` commands to list

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to a different value. You can use the ``symfony envs`` commands to list
```

environments currently present on SymfonyCloud.

.. tip:: One can also use the ``--environment`` flag.

.. _cd-env-create-delete:

Creating and deleting environments
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``symfony env:create <name> <parent>`` command creates a new SymfonyCloud
environment. Most users don't need to provide any argument when running it

> locally, but when running inside a script it is best to specify them. The first

Reviewer 2: This sentence appears unclear.

What does _most users_ mean? 

Perhaps it would be better to clarify that there are

- optional arguments that default to specific values
- options that default to specific values

rather than vaguely suggesting that a reader could belong to the group of _most users_.

What  do you think?

argument is the name desired for the environment to be created on SymfonyCloud.
The second argument is the name of the "parent" environment. The new environment
will be created first as a copy of the parent and as result inherits the
parent's code and data.

Deleting an environment can be made using the ``symfony project env:delete
<name>`` command.

.. _cd-url:

Environments URLs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each SymfonyCloud environment gets a unique subdomain that can not be determined
before its creation. Once created this domain is stable.

This implies that the application code has to consider this: avoid any
hard-coded domain values. Even Symfony parameters should be avoided and the use

> of the current request's host should be prefered. This might also make working

Reviewer: `prefered` -> `preferred`

with systems like OAuth, SSO or webhooks difficult. To help you work with this,
SymfonyCloud exposes a ``SYMFONY_PROJECT_DEFAULT_ROUTE_URL`` environment
variable, more information in `the dedicated section
<symfonycloud-environment-variables>`_.

> To determine the available URLs from your automated system, please use the

Reviewer 2: I can also run the command locally, so this is not limited to automated systems.

Author: There's no mention of such limitation.

   exact image has been validated.

When implementing Continuous Delivery with SymfonyCloud, the changes to the
infrastructure configuration is expected to be mostly manual depending on your
needs. The automation will focus on creating environments and deploying the
changes. There are two possible approaches:

* Fully automated using our `integrations`_
* `Custom implementation`_ using the
  `Symfony CLI <https://symfony.com/download>`_ commands.

Integrations
------------

SymfonyCloud provides integrations with the main Git providers of the market.
Those integrations rely on webhooks those providers trigger on specific events
such as code push, branch creation or pull request opening: environments are
created and deleted on the fly when branches are created or deleted, code and
configuration changes are deployed automatically on pushes. Depending on the
configuration on SymfonyCloud side, only specific branches can be deployed or
pull/merge requests can be deployed or skipped.

.. tip::

   To ease reviewers works, for most Git providers, integrations push links to
   the deployed environments as a commit status or as a comment to the
   discussion.

> Please refer to :doc:`our integrations list </integrations/index>` to discover

Reviewer 3: This link doesn't exist yet.

Author: Please see #96

* `URLs <cd-url>`_

.. _cd-requirements:

Requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The system implementing a custom SymfonyCloud deployment automation will have
several requirements:

#. Have the `Symfony CLI <https://symfony.com/download>`_ installed and runnable
#. Have Git installed and runnable
#. Have `authentication`_ completed

Authentication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If the automation is expected to be run interactively by human beings, they must
first - locally on their machine - setup Git and run ``symfony login`` as
well as ``symfony account:ssh:key:add``.

.. _machine-user:

If the implementation is to be run in a non-interactive environment (in a system
like Jenkins, Travis, GitLab CI or GitHub Actions for example), we recommend the
use of a "Machine user":  head to `SymfonyConnect <https://connect.symfony.com>`_
and register a new dedicated account.

As this context will not be interactive, interactive authentication will not be
possible, this is why you have to use an :doc:`API token
</cookbooks/api_tokens>`.

Additionally, as deployment are based on Git, you will
have to generate a new SSH key, and register it in SymfonyCloud:

.. code-block:: terminal

>    $ ssh-keygen -N '' -f symfonycloud-ci.key

Reviewer 3: I'm unsure why, but CircleCI wouldn't let this private key be added via their UI. The error was,

> It looks like this private key is invalid. Please check if you have pasted the right key. If you are sure your key is valid, please contact support for assistance.

When I used this, it worked:

`ssh-keygen -m PEM -t rsa -C "me@example.com" -f symfonycloud-ci.key`

* ``DEBIAN_FRONTEND`` environment variable is set to ``noninteractive``
* Presence of several environment variable based on commonly used by CI systems
  (``BUILD_ID``, ``GITLAB_CI``, ``TRAVIS``, ``CIRCLECI``, etc)
* ``SHELL_INTERACTIVE`` environment variables is set to ``''`` (the empty
  string)

If your system is not automatically detected, you can use the
``--no-interaction`` flag.

.. _cd-env-flags:

CLI flags and environment variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The CLI tool exposes flags and check some environment variables in order to
allow you to change its behavior. As a general rule, for automated context,
environment variables are preferable. Flags can be used to override environment
variables punctually:

.. code-block:: terminal

   $ export SYMFONY_ENVIRONMENT=pr-1
   $ symfony deploy
   # Deploying to pr-1
   $ symfony deploy --environment=staging
   # Deploying to staging

SYMFONY_PROJECT
"""""""""""""""

Setting this environment value replace the need to run ``symfony project:link``.

Its value should be set to the SymfonyCloud project's id that can be found with
``symfony project:info`` or in the emails sent by SymfonyCloud.

> .. tip:: One can also use the ``--project`` flag.

Reviewer 3: Deploying with `--project` works for me; setting `SYMFONY_PROJECT` as an environment variable doesn't.

Author: Fixed in v4.18.4

By default, when SymfonyCloud needs to work on the remote environment, it tries
to find an existing environment whose name matches the current Git branch name.
Changing this logic can be done by setting the ``SYMFONY_ENVIRONMENT``
environment variable to a different value. You can use the ``symfony envs``
commands to list environments currently present on SymfonyCloud.

.. tip:: One can also use the ``--environment`` flag.

SYMFONY_NO_INTERACTION
""""""""""""""""""""""

Can be used to override the automatic detection made by the CLI.

.. tip:: One can also use the ``--no-interaction`` flag.

.. _cd-env-create-delete:

Creating and deleting environments
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``symfony env:create <name> <parent>`` command creates a new SymfonyCloud
environment. It is not usually required to provide any argument when running it
locally, but when running inside a script it is best to specify them. The first
argument is the name desired for the environment to be created on SymfonyCloud.
The second argument is the name of the "parent" environment: the new environment
will first be created as a copy of the parent and as result inherits the
parent's code and data.

> Deleting an environment can be made using the ``symfony project env:delete
> <name>`` command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An environment can be deleted using the ``symfony project env:delete <name>`` command.
```

.. _cd-url:

Environments URLs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each SymfonyCloud environment gets a unique subdomain that can not be determined
before its creation. Once created this domain is stable.

This implies that the application code has to consider this: avoid any
hard-coded domain values. Even Symfony parameters should be avoided and the use
of the current request's host should be preferred. This requirement make working
with systems like OAuth, SSO or webhooks more difficult. To help you work with
this, SymfonyCloud exposes a ``SYMFONY_PROJECT_DEFAULT_ROUTE_URL`` environment
variable. More information in `the dedicated section
<symfonycloud-environment-variables>`_.

> To determine the available URLs from your automated system, please use the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To determine the available URLs, please use the
```
